The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life and Surprising Exploits of Jack
Sheppard, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Life and Surprising Exploits of Jack Sheppard

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: June 5, 2020 [EBook #62320]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND SURPRISING ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                  PRINTED BY S. & J. KEYS, DEVONPORT.

                            [Illustration:

                                  THE
                                _LIFE_
                                  AND
                              ADVENTURES

                                 _of_
                             JACK SHEPPARD]




                   THE LIFE AND SURPRISING EXPLOITS

                                  OF

                            JACK SHEPPARD.

[Illustration: [_Jack Sheppard beating his Master._]]


Jack Sheppard was born in the parish of Stepney, near London, in the
year 1702. His father was a Carpenter, and he died when Jack was so
young, that Jack could not recollect ever seeing him. Hence the burthen
of his maintenance, together with that of his brother and sister, lay
upon his mother, who soon procured him admission into the workhouse, in
Bishopsgate-street, where he continued for a year and a half; and,
during that time, received an education sufficient to qualify him for
the trade his mother designed him, viz., a carpenter: accordingly, he
was recommended to Mr. Wood, in Wych-street, Drury-lane, and bound to
him for seven years. The lad proved an early proficient. Being an
ingenious hand, he soon became master of his business, and gave such
satisfaction to his master’s customers, that he had the character of a
very sober, orderly boy; but, alas, unhappy youth! before he had
completed six years of his apprenticeship, he formed a fatal
acquaintance with one Elizabeth Lyon, (otherwise called Edgworth Bess,
from a town of that name in Middlesex, where she was born,) the reputed
wife of a soldier, and who lived in a debauched life. Our young hero
became enamoured of her, and they cohabited as man and wife.

This was the foundation of his ruin. Sheppard grew weary of the yoke of
servitude, and began to dispute with his master. Being one day at work
at Mr. Britt’s, the Sun alehouse, near Islington, he on a trivial
occasion, fell upon his master, and beat and bruised him in a barbarous
and shameful manner. Such a sudden and deplorable change was there in
the behaviour of this promising young man. Next ensued a neglect of duty
both to God and his master, lying out of nights, perpetual jarring and
animosities. These were the consequences of his intimacy with this
harlot, who, by the sequel, will appear to have been the main loadstone
in bringing him to the fatal tree.

Edgworth Bess having stolen a gold ring from a gentleman, to whom she
had introduced herself in the street, was sent to St. Giles’s
round-house. Sheppard went immediately to his consort; and, after a
short discourse with Mr. Brown, the beadle, and his wife, who had the
care of the place, he fell upon the poor old couple, took the keys from
them, and let his lady out, in spite of all the outcries and opposition
they were capable of making.

About July, 1723, he was, by his master, sent to perform a repair at the
house of Mr Braines, a piece-broker, in White-horse-yard--From thence he
stole a roll of fustian, containing twenty-four yards, which was
afterwards found in his trunk.

This is supposed to be the first robbery he ever committed; and it was
not long before he repeated another upon the same Mr. Braines, by
breaking into his house in the night time, and taking out of the till £7
in money, and goods from the shop to the value of £14 more. How he
entered this house was a secret, until upon being committed to Newgate
he confessed that he took up the iron bars at the cellar window, and
after he had done his business nailed them down again: so that Mr.
Braines never believed that his house had been broken open; and a woman,
a lodger in the house, lay all the while under suspicion of having
committed the robbery.

Sheppard and his master parted ten months before the expiration of his
apprenticeship: a woeful parting to the former. He lost a good, careful
patron, and lay exposed to the temptations of the most wicked wretches
the town could afford, such as Joseph Blake, _alias_

[Illustration: [_Jack Sheppard and his Comrades encountering the
Game-keepers._]]

Blueskin; ---- Dowling; James Sykes, _alias_ Hell and Fury, by whom he
was seduced into every kind of vice! After breaking into a house near
Kennington, they were all nearly apprehended by some game-keepers, who
happened to pass that way, and with whom they had a desperate battle.
Soon after this, Sheppard being on horseback, met his late master near
Finchly, whom he first robbed, and then tying him on his horse, with his
face towards his tail, flogged him unmercifully with a whip.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sheppard had a brother named Thomas, a carpenter by profession, but a
notorious thief and housebreaker by practice. Thomas being committed to
Newgate for breaking open the house of Mrs. M. Cook, a linen draper in
Clare-market, on the 5th of February, and stealing goods to the amount
of £50 or £60, impeached his brother, John Sheppard, and Edgworth Bess,
as being concerned with him in this fact; and these three were charged
with being concerned together in breaking into the house of Mr. William
Phillips, in Drury-lane, and stealing divers goods, the property of Mrs.
Frederick, a lodger in the house, on the 14th of the said month of
February. All possible endeavours were used by Mrs. Cook and Mr.
Phillips to get John Sheppard and Edgworth Bess apprehended, but to no
purpose, till the following accident:--Sheppard being on his wicked
range in London, committing robberies wherever he could, one day met
with his old acquaintance, James Sykes, _alias_ Hell and Fury, sometimes
a chairman, and sometimes a running footman. He was invited by him to go
to one Sedgate’s, a victualling house, near the Seven Dials, to play a
game at skittles. Sheppard complied, and Sykes secretly sent for Mr.
Price, a constable in St. Giles’s Parish, and charged him with his
friend Sheppard for robbing Mrs. Cook, &c. Sheppard was carried before
Justice Parry, who ordered him to St. Giles’s round-house, till the next
morning, for further examination. He was confined in the upper part of
the place, being two stories from the ground; but, before two hours, by
only the help of a razor and the stretcher of a chair, he broke open the
top of the round-house, and, tying together a sheet and blanket, by them
descended into the church-yard, and escaped, leaving the parish to
repair the damage, and repent the affront put upon his skill and
capacity.

The night after this, Jack and Bess broke into a house in Chancery-lane,
and finding an old gentleman up, put a rope round his neck, and
threatened to murder him, while Bess plundered the rooms.

On the 19th of May, in the evening, Sheppard, with another robber, named
Benson, was passing through Leicester-fields, where a gentleman stood
accusing a woman with an attempt to steal his watch. A mob was gathered
about the disputants. Sheppard’s companion got in among them, and picked
the gentleman’s pocket in earnest of his watch. The scene was now
changed from an attempted robbery to a real one: and in a moment ensued
an outcry of “Stop thief!” Sheppard and Benson took to their heels; but
Sheppard was seized by a sergeant of the guard at Leicester-house,
crying out “Stop thief!” with much earnestness. He was conveyed to St.
Ann’s round-house, in Soho, and kept secure till the next morning, when
Edgworth Bess came to visit him, who was seized also. They were carried
before Justice Walker, when the people in Drury Lane and Clare-market
appeared, and charged them with the robberies before-mentioned; but
Sheppard pretending to impeach certain accomplices, the justices
committed them to the New Prison, with an intent to have them removed to
Newgate, unless there came from them some useful discoveries. Sheppard
was now a second time in the hands of justice; but how long he intended
to keep in them the reader will soon be able to judge.

He and his mate were now in a strong and well-guarded prison, himself
loaded with a pair of double links, and bazils of about 14lb. weight,
and confined together in the safest apartment, called Newgate ward.

[Illustration: [_Sheppard making his escape from the condemned hole._]]

Sheppard, conscious of his crime, and knowing the information he had
made to be but a blind scheme, that would avail nothing, began to
meditate an escape. They had been thus detained four days, when their
friends, having the liberty of seeing them, furnished Jack with
implements proper for his design; accordingly he went to work, and, on
the 25th of May, being Whitsunday, at about two o’clock in the morning,
completed a practicable breach, and sawed off his fetters; having, with
unheard of diligence and dexterity, cut off an iron bar from the window,
and took out a mutin or bar, of the most solid oak, about nine inches in
thickness, by boring it through in many places, with great skill and
labour.--They had still twenty-five feet to descend. Sheppard fastened a
sheet and blankets to the bars, caused madam to take off her gown and
petticoat, and sent her out first. She being more corpulent than
himself, it was with great difficulty he got her through the opening;
but, on observing his directions, she was instantly down, more
frightened than hurt. Out hero followed, and lighted with ease and
pleasure. But where are they now?--Why, escaped out of one prison into
another. The reader is to understand that the New Prison and
Clerkenwell Bridewell lie contiguous to each other, and that Sheppard
and Bess got into the yard of the latter, where they had a wall of 22
feet high to scale before their liberty was perfected. Sheppard, far
from being unprepared to surmount this difficulty, had his gimblets and
piercers ready, and made a scaling-ladder. While the keepers and
prisoners of both places were asleep in their beds, he mounts with his
lady, and in less than ten minutes gets over the wall with her,
completing his liberation. His escape from the condemned hole in Newgate
made a far greater noise in the world than that from the New Prison; and
it has been allowed by all the gaol-keepers, in London, that one so
extraordinary was never before performed in England. The broken chairs
and bars are kept at the New Prison to testify the fact and preserve the
memory of the villain.

[Illustration: [_The Law Stationer imploring Sheppard not to rob him._]]

The next evening, alone, he entered the house of a Law Stationer, in the
same street, who went down upon his knees, and implored him not to rob
him. Sheppard, however, laughed at him for a fool; and, giving him a
kick, which made him senseless, robbed the house of all he could lay his
hands on. The next crime Sheppard and his companions committed was to
rob Mr. Kneebone, near the New Church, of property to the value of £300,
for which he was a short time after taken, by a domestic of Jonathan
Wild, tried, and sentenced to death. Being taken to the condemned hole,
Sheppard once more contemplated escape; and, having got implements, by
some means, for that purpose, he affected it on the very evening that
the warrant for his execution came from Windsor.

He had not been many days at liberty, before he wrote the two following
letters; and, dressing himself, at night, like a porter, went to Mr.
Applebee’s house, in Blackfriars, who at that time printed what are
termed the dying speeches of the persons executed, and left them with
his maid-servant:--


     “_Mr. Applebee,_--

     “_This, with my kind love to you, and pray give my kind love to Mr.
     Wagstaff, hoping these few lines will find you in good health, as I
     am at present, but I must own you are the loser for want of my
     dying speech; but to make up your loss, if you think this sheet
     worth your while, pray make the best of it. Though they do say I am
     taken among the smugglers, and put into Dover Castle, yet I hope I
     am among the smugglers still. So no more, but your humble servant,_

                                                      “_JOHN SHEPPARD._

     “_P.S. I desire you will be the postman with this letter to Mr.
     Austin, the jail-keeper; so farewell; now I quit the English
     shore._

                        “_NEWGATE, FAREWELL._”



     “_Mr. Austin,_--

     “_You was pleased to pass your jokes upon me, and did say, you
     should not have been angry with me, had I took my leave of you; but
     now pray keep your jokes to yourself; let them laugh that win; for
     now it is an equal chance, you to take me, or I to go away; but I
     own myself guilty of that ill manners; but excuse me, for my
     departure being private and necessary, spoiled the ceremony of
     bidding adieu. But I wish you all as well as I am at present. But
     pray be not angry for the loss of your irons; had you not given me
     them I had not taken them away; but really I had left them behind
     me had convenience served. So do not be angry. And what is amiss
     done, you right, for my scholarship is but small. This, from your
     fortunate prisoner,_

                                                     “_JOHN SHEPPARD._”


In a few nights after leaving these letters, he broke open a shop in
Monmouth-street, and stole some wearing apparel. On the 29th of October
he broke open the house of Mr. Robert Rawlins, a pawnbroker, in
Drury-lane, from whence he took a sword, a suit of apparel, a snuff box,
rings, watches, and goods to a considerable extent.

On the 31st of October he dined with his two women, Cook and Skeggs, at
a public-house in Newgate-street, where they were very merry together.
About four in the afternoon they took coach, and drawing up the windows,
passed through Newgate, which then was similar to Temple-bar, and on to
the Shears’-alehouse, in Maypole-street, by Clare-market; where, in the
evening, he sent for his mother, and treated her with some brandy. As
she knew the danger he was in, she advised him to take care of himself,
and keep out of the way; but Jack had been drinking pretty hard, and was
grown too wise to take counsel, and too valiant to fear anything; and,
therefore, leaving his mother, he strolled about in the neighbourhood,
from alehouse to gin-shop, till near 12 o’clock, when he was apprehended
by means of an alehouse boy, who had accidentally seen him. Poor Jack
was then drunk, unable to make any resistance, and was once more
conveyed to Newgate.

[Illustration: [_Jack securely fettered in Newgate._]]

The 10th of November he was carried to the King’s Bench bar, at
Westminster, where the record of his conviction being read, and an
affidavit made that he was the same John Sheppard mentioned in that
record, Mr. Justice Power awarded sentence of death against him, and a
rule of court was made for his execution on the Monday following.

He was hanged at Tyburn, on Monday, November 16th, 1724, in the 23rd
year of his age. He died with great difficulty, and much pitied by the
mob. When he had hung about a quarter of an hour he was cut down by a
soldier, and delivered to his friends, who carried him to the
Barley-mow, in Long-acre. He was buried the same evening, in St.
Martin’s church-yard.


              DEVONPORT: PRINTED BY SAMUEL AND JOHN KEYS.

                   *       *       *       *       *


                              CHILDREN’S

                             SCHOOL BOOKS,

                                _&c._,

                 PUBLISHED BY S. & J. KEYS, DEVONPORT,

                         WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.


     The IMPROVED CHILD’S INSTRUCTOR, intended as a First and Easy
     Introduction to Spelling and Reading. Price One Penny.

     The FIRST STEP TO LEARNING; or, Parents’ best Gift to their
     Children; containing Words from One to Four Syllables. To which are
     added Easy Reading, Spelling, and Fables, the whole of the Church
     Catechism, Select Poetry, &c. Price One Penny.

     The CHILD’S OWN SPELLING BOOK, containing a variety of instructive
     Reading Lessons, Spelling, Natural History, Poetry, Tree of
     Dissipation, &c. Price One Penny.

     A new ARITHMETICAL TABLE BOOK, for the use of Schools, enlarged and
     improved, containing 32 pages. Price One Penny.

     The UNIVERSAL PRIMER; or, Child’s Guide to Learning. Price One
     Penny.

     The CHILD’S FIRST BOOK; or, English Primer; on a plan which cannot
     fail to delight young children, and facilitate their Instruction in
     the first elements of Spelling and Easy Reading. Price Threepence.

     A NEW READING MADE EASY; containing a quantity of Spelling and
     Reading Lessons; to which are added several Pieces of Select
     Poetry, &c.; embellished with Engravings. Price Threepence.

     The UNIVERSAL SPELLING BOOK; or, a New and Easy Guide to the
     English Language, containing a greater quantity of Spelling than
     any other Edition ever published. Price Sixpence.


       A great variety of Threepenny Song Books always on sale.


    Publishers of upwards of Twenty Sorts of One Penny Song Books.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life and Surprising Exploits of
Jack Sheppard, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND SURPRISING ***

***** This file should be named 62320-0.txt or 62320-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/3/2/62320/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
